Attempt at modernizing the sidecar SPIRE integration doc (#15574)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/ops/integrations/spire/index.md

For a quick demo of how this SPIRE integration with Istio works, see [Integrating SPIRE as a CA through Envoy's SDS API]({{< github_tree >}}/samples/security/spire).

## Install SPIRE

We recommend you follow SPIRE's installation instructions and best practices for installing SPIRE, and for deploying SPIRE in production environments.

For the examples in this guide, the [SPIRE Helm charts](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/spiffe/spire) will be used with upstream defaults, to focus on just the configuration necessary to integrate SPIRE and Istio.

{{< text syntax=bash snip_id=install_spire_crds >}}
$ helm upgrade --install -n spire-server spire-crds spire-crds --repo https://spiffe.github.io/helm-charts-hardened/ --create-namespace
{{< /text >}}

{{< text syntax=bash snip_id=install_spire_istio_overrides >}}

> $ helm upgrade --install -n spire-server spire spire --repo https://spiffe.github.io/helm-charts-hardened/ --wait -f - <<EOF

Reviewer: Wouldn't you use a `--set` for a single value?

Author: You would, I was originally overriding more stuff with the heredoc before I realized this was all that was needed.

global:
  spire:
    trustDomain: example.org
EOF
{{< /text >}}

{{< tip >}}
See the [SPIRE Helm chart](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/spiffe/spire) documentation for other values you can configure for your installation.
{{< /tip >}}

> It is important that SPIRE and Istio are configured with the exact same trust domain, to prevent authentication and authorization errors.

Reviewer: this comment seems a little lost here; I assume it's the reason you are setting example.org in the option above?  Should it come before it if so?

Author: Rereading it, it really belongs in the `{{ tip }}`, so I moved it there.

> 

Reviewer: Lines 22-26 above seem like they could be removed

## Install SPIRE

> Istio recommends you follow SPIRE's installation instructions and general recommendations for installing SPIRE.

Author: Yeah - I asked about this in the SPIFFE slack: https://spiffe.slack.com/archives/C7XDP01HB/p1723834830891379

1. The charts are still "beta" but are slated to be the standard.
2. Even the  beta charts are MUCH MUCH more recommended than us shipping our own wildly out of date DIY yaml to install another CNCF project's components.
3. I've used the charts personally, they work quite well and are (IMO) better than ours.

> For this guide, the [SPIRE Helm charts](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/spiffe/spire) will be used as a simple way to install SPIRE dependencies for Istio and illustrate the configuration necessary to integrate SPIRE and Istio.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "non production" instructions in the [SPIRE Helm charts](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/spiffe/spire) will allow you a simple way to install SPIRE dependencies for Istio, and illustrate the configuration necessary to integrate the two.
```

Author: I'll reword this.

In general tho I want to avoid mentioning anything about the production readiness of any method listed here - that's SPIRE's business, not ours.

Istio is making _absolutely no_ recommendations about how you should install SPIRE, this is just an example. Making a recommendation is their job, and if their recommendations change, theirs win.

{{< text syntax=bash snip_id=install_spire_crds >}}
$ helm upgrade --install -n spire-server spire-crds spire-crds --repo https://spiffe.github.io/helm-charts-hardened/ --create-namespace
{{< /text >}}

> {{< text syntax-bash snip_id=install_spire_istio_overrides >}}

Reviewer: Can you put a sentence above this explaining what it is doing/why it is needed?

$ helm upgrade --install -n spire-server spire spire --repo https://spiffe.github.io/helm-charts-hardened/ --wait -f - <<EOF
global:
  spire:
    trustDomain: example.org
EOF
{{< /text >}}

{{< tip >}}

>   See the [SPIRE Helm chart](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/spiffe/spire) documentation for other values you can configure for your installation - this doc only mentions the minimal subset required to achieve Istio integration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the minimal subset of changes required to integrate with Istio.  See the [SPIRE Helm chart](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/spiffe/spire) documentation for other values you can configure for your installation.
```

(Or just don't put this in at all because we've hinted that this isn't a production SPIRE install)

Author: Again - mostly the goal here is to say "we don't care how you install SPIRE, defer to the SPIRE docs for that, these are just the things Istio needs, regardless of how you do it"

{{< /tip >}}

> This will also install 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will also install:
```

- The [SPIFFE CSI driver](https://github.com/spiffe/spiffe-csi), which is used to mount an Envoy-compatible SDS socket into proxies. Using the SPIFFE CSI driver to mount SDS sockets is strongly recommended by both Istio and SPIRE, as `hostMounts` are a larger security risk and introduce operational hurdles.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

No extra newline between same list items.

Author: yep, this should have been WIP, didn't lint, fixing

> - The [SPIFFE CSI driver](https://github.com/spiffe/spiffe-csi) which is used to mount an Envoy-compatible SDS socket into proxies. Using the SPIFFE CSI driver to mount SDS sockets is strongly recommended by both Istio and SPIRE, as `hostMounts` are a larger security risk and introduce operational hurdles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The [SPIFFE CSI driver](https://github.com/spiffe/spiffe-csi), which is used to mount an Envoy-compatible SDS socket into proxies. Using the SPIFFE CSI driver to mount SDS sockets is strongly recommended by both Istio and SPIRE, as `hostMounts` are a larger security risk and introduce operational hurdles.
```

- The [SPIRE Controller Manager](https://github.com/spiffe/spire-controller-manager), which eases the creation of SPIFFE registrations for workloads.

## Register workloads

> SPIRE by-design only grants identities to workloads that have been registered with the SPIRE server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By design, SPIRE only grants identities to workloads that have been registered with the SPIRE server.
```

> This includes your user workloads, as well as Istio's own workloads - Istio sidecars and gateways, once configured for SPIRE integration, cannot get identities, and therefore cannot reach READY status, unless there is a preexisting, matching SPIRE registration created for them ahead of time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This includes user workloads, as well as Istio components. Istio sidecars and gateways, once configured for SPIRE integration, cannot get identities, and therefore cannot reach READY status, unless there is a preexisting, matching SPIRE registration created for them, ahead of time.
```

(Have this run on from the previous sentence? I can't do that in GitHub)

See the [SPIRE help on Registering workloads](https://spiffe.io/docs/latest/deploying/registering/) for more information on using multiple selectors to strengthen attestation criteria, and the selectors available.

This section describes the options available for registering Istio workloads in a SPIRE Server and provides some example workload registrations.

{{< warning >}}

> Istio currently requires a specific SPIFFE ID format for workloads. All registrations must follow the Istio SPIFFE ID pattern: `spiffe://<trust.domain>/ns/<namespace>/sa/<service-account>`

Reviewer: Currently?  Is this expected to change?

Author: We have multiple open bugs to fix this and I intend to change it a bit, so yes.

{{< /warning >}}

### Option 1: Auto-registration using the SPIRE Controller Manager

New entries will be automatically registered for each new pod that matches the selector defined in a [ClusterSPIFFEID](https://github.com/spiffe/spire-controller-manager/blob/main/docs/clusterspiffeid-crd.md) custom resource. 

Both Istio sidecars and Istio gateways need to be registered with SPIRE, so that they can request identities.

#### Istio Gateway ClusterSPIFFEID

> The following will create a ClusterSPIFFEID which will auto-register any Istio Ingress gateway pod with SPIRE if it is scheduled into the `istio-system` namespace, and has a service account named `istio-ingressgateway-service-account`. These selectors are used as a simple example, consult the [SPIRE Controller Manager documentation](https://github.com/spiffe/spire-controller-manager/blob/main/docs/clusterspiffeid-crd.md) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following will create a `ClusterSPIFFEID` which will auto-register any Istio Ingress gateway pod with SPIRE if it is scheduled into the `istio-system` namespace, and has a service account named `istio-ingressgateway-service-account`. These selectors are used as a simple example; consult the [SPIRE Controller Manager documentation](https://github.com/spiffe/spire-controller-manager/blob/main/docs/clusterspiffeid-crd.md) for more details.
```

{{< text syntax=bash snip_id=spire_csid_istio_gateway >}}
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: spire.spiffe.io/v1alpha1
kind: ClusterSPIFFEID
metadata:
  name: istio-ingressgateway-reg
spec:
  spiffeIDTemplate: "spiffe://{{ .TrustDomain }}/ns/{{ .PodMeta.Namespace }}/sa/{{ .PodSpec.ServiceAccountName }}"
  workloadSelectorTemplates:
    - "k8s:ns:istio-system"
    - "k8s:sa:istio-ingressgateway-service-account"
EOF
{{< /text >}}

#### Istio Sidecar ClusterSPIFFEID

> The following will create a ClusterSPIFFEID which will auto-register any pod with the `spiffe.io/spire-managed-identity: true` label that is deployed into the `default` namespace with SPIRE. These selectors are used as a simple example, consult the [SPIRE Controller Manager documentation](https://github.com/spiffe/spire-controller-manager/blob/main/docs/clusterspiffeid-crd.md) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following will create a ClusterSPIFFEID which will auto-register any pod with the `spiffe.io/spire-managed-identity: true` label that is deployed into the `default` namespace with SPIRE. These selectors are used as a simple example; consult the [SPIRE Controller Manager documentation](https://github.com/spiffe/spire-controller-manager/blob/main/docs/clusterspiffeid-crd.md) for more details.
```

{{< text syntax=bash snip_id=spire_csid_istio_gateway >}}
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: spire.spiffe.io/v1alpha1
kind: ClusterSPIFFEID
metadata:
  name: istio-ingressgateway-reg
spec:
  spiffeIDTemplate: "spiffe://{{ .TrustDomain }}/ns/{{ .PodMeta.Namespace }}/sa/{{ .PodSpec.ServiceAccountName }}"
  workloadSelectorTemplates:
    - "k8s:ns:default"
    - "k8s:pod-label:spiffe.io/spire-managed-identity:true"
EOF
{{< /text >}}

### Option 2: Manual Registration

> Skip these steps if you installed `SPIRE` by following the [quick start](#option-1-quick-start) since it uses automatic registration.

Reviewer: I assume this doesn't apply any more.

If you wish to manually create your SPIRE registrations, rather than use the SPIRE Controller Manager mentioned in [the recommended Option 1](#option-1-auto-registration-using-the-spire-controller-manager), refer to the [SPIRE documentation on manual registration](https://spiffe.io/docs/latest/deploying/registering/).

> Below are the equivalent manual registrations based off the automatic registrations in [Option 1](#option-1-auto-registration-using-the-spire-controller-manager):
> 
> The following steps assume you have [already followed the SPIRE documentation to manually register your SPIRE agent and node attestation](https://spiffe.io/docs/latest/deploying/registering/#1-defining-the-spiffe-id-of-the-agent) and that your SPIRE agent was registered with the SPIFFE identity `spiffe://example.org/ns/spire/sa/spire-agent`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below are the equivalent manual registrations based off the automatic registrations in Option 1. The following steps assume you have [already followed the SPIRE documentation to manually register your SPIRE agent and node attestation](https://spiffe.io/docs/latest/deploying/registering/#1-defining-the-spiffe-id-of-the-agent) and that your SPIRE agent was registered with the SPIFFE identity `spiffe://example.org/ns/spire/sa/spire-agent`.
```

> 1. Get the spire-server pod:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Get the `spire-server` pod:
```

        -selector k8s:sa:istio-ingressgateway-service-account \
        -selector k8s:ns:istio-system \
        -socketPath /run/spire/sockets/server.sock

    Entry ID         : 6f2fe370-5261-4361-ac36-10aae8d91ff7
    SPIFFE ID        : spiffe://example.org/ns/istio-system/sa/istio-ingressgateway-service-account
    Parent ID        : spiffe://example.org/ns/spire/sa/spire-agent
    Revision         : 0
    TTL              : default
    Selector         : k8s:ns:istio-system
    Selector         : k8s:sa:istio-ingressgateway-service-account
    {{< /text >}}

1. Register an entry for workloads injected with an Istio sidecar:

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl exec -n spire "$SPIRE_SERVER_POD" -- \
    /opt/spire/bin/spire-server entry create \
        -spiffeID spiffe://example.org/ns/default/sa/sleep \
        -parentID spiffe://example.org/ns/spire/sa/spire-agent \
        -selector k8s:ns:default \
        -selector k8s:pod-label:spiffe.io/spire-managed-identity:true \
        -socketPath /run/spire/sockets/server.sock
    {{< /text >}}

## Install Istio

1. [Download the Istio release](/docs/setup/additional-setup/download-istio-release/).

> 1. Create the Istio configuration with custom patches for the Ingress-gateway and istio-proxy. The Ingress Gateway component includes the `spiffe.io/spire-managed-identity: "true"` label.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create the Istio configuration with custom patches for the Ingress Gateway and `istio-proxy`. The Ingress Gateway component includes the `spiffe.io/spire-managed-identity: "true"` label.
```

>         trustDomain: example.org

Reviewer: odd indent?

Author: I _think_ this is correct? I didn't change it. Lemme check how it renders tho.

    {{< text syntax=bash snip_id=none >}}
    $ kubectl get pods -n istio-system
    NAME                                    READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
    istio-ingressgateway-5b45864fd4-lgrxs   1/1     Running   0          17s
    istiod-989f54d9c-sg7sn                  1/1     Running   0          23s
    {{< /text >}}

>     The Ingress-gateway pod is `Ready` since the corresponding registration entry is automatically created for it on the SPIRE Server. Envoy is able to fetch cryptographic identities from SPIRE.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The Ingress Gateway pod is `Ready` since the corresponding registration entry is automatically created for it on the SPIRE Server. Envoy is able to fetch cryptographic identities from SPIRE.
```

>     This configuration also adds an initContainer to the gateway that will wait for SPIRE to create the UNIX Domain Socket before starting the istio-proxy. If the SPIRE agent is not ready or has not been properly configured with the same socket path, the Ingress Gateway initContainer will wait forever.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This configuration also adds an `initContainer` to the gateway that will wait for SPIRE to create the UNIX Domain Socket before starting the `istio-proxy`. If the SPIRE agent is not ready, or has not been properly configured with the same socket path, the Ingress Gateway `initContainer` will wait forever.
```

## Cleanup SPIRE

> {{< text syntax=bash snip_id=uninstall_spire >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remove SPIRE by uninstalling its Helm chart:

{{< text syntax=bash snip_id=uninstall_spire >}}
```
